---
title: '2024-05-17'
---

## Present

- Summarized the status of Peras prototyping and defined next steps.
- Outlined the business value of formal methods.
- Investigated different approaches for representing a voting string in Agda: the first attempt implemented a formal language using equational reasoning and a coalgebraic style.
- Changed the reflexive transitive closure of the small-step semantics to a List-like syntax similar to what has been proposed in `test-demo`. This allows to express execution steps in a concise way and could be used as DSL for specifying test-cases and attack-scenarios.
- Computed the size in bytes of the various keys and certificates involved in Peras, under the assumption that it uses existing keys and crypto available to a Cardano node.
- Sketched a detailed design of what the independent voting layer would look like.
- Designed an Agda+Haskell workflow where Agda formal specifications for Peras can be made decidable and then exported as an executable specification for Haskell `quickcheck-dynamic` tests.
- Met with Max (Quviq) to settle next steps in their support of Peras.
    - Suggest improvements in exising Agda+Haskell workflow and code, including identifying changes to `agda` and/or `agda2hs` that would streamline the workflow.
    - Demonstrate how to convert proofs present in the workflow into property-based tests in `quickcheck-dynamic`.
- Started mapping the spectrum of conformance testing relevant for a Peras CIP and RFP. The overall goal is "conformance without over-specification".
- Discussed strategies for making the Peras specification readable by the broad Cardano commmunity.

## Future

- Complete Praos proofs à la Baspitter.
- Model voting and vote diffusion in detail using Dynamic QuickCheck and ΔQ.
- Construct Dynamic QuickCheck tests for adversarial scenarios.
- Continue refining requirements for conformance testing.
- Conduct additional stakeholder interviews, with an aim to define the ideal form of a Peras CIP.

## Issues

- The Peras protocol paper is expected to be submitted May 22.
- The target date for the in-person Peras meeting is June 24.
