---
title: '2024-05-10'
---

## Present

- Implemented [prototype ALBA-based certificate construction](https://github.com/cardano-scaling/alba) and measured the [CPU and message resources](../../Logbook.md#crypto-benchmarks) needed to use it for Peras voting certificates.
    - CPU resources required would not burden the node.
    - Certificate size is moderate and likely not a major concern.
- Began aligning the Peras formalization in Agda to the latest draft of the research paper.
- Translated the Peras protocol definition in the latest draft of the research paper into [an executable Agda specification](../../Logbook.md#executable-specification-in-agda), used `agda2hs` to convert it to Haskell code, and implemented basic dynamic tests using `quickcheck-dynamic`
- Computed probabilities of various [adversarial Peras scenarios](Logbook.md#probabilities-of-various-peras-scenarios).
- Drafted the outline for the [Peras CIP](https://hackmd.io/hv_2Rr2dTleBFfI4kV2oqQ).
- [Mapped](https://input-output-rnd.slack.com/files/U01PBE14X0A/F07309JQW1W/peras_-_stakeholders_map.pdf) stakeholder relationships, concerns, and artifacts.
- Conducted a [retrospective of Peras PI5](../../Logbook.md#team-retrospective).
- Hans Lahe joined the Peras team (1/3 time) as a product representative. ❤️

## Future

- Continue alignment of Peras formalization with the latest draft of the research paper.
    - voting strings
    - big-step semantics
- Simulate certificate and vote diffusion with ΔQ.
    - Review results with PNSol (Neil and Peter).
- Construct Dynamic QuickCheck tests for adversarial scenarios.
- Define requirements for conformance testing.
- Conduct stakeholder interviews.
    - Meet with Consensus team and Tweag to learn their preferences for Peras documentation, tests, and other artifacts.
    - Consider ideal form of CIP from the perspective of SPOs, CF, Intersect, etc.

## Issues

- Details of the Peras protocol may continue to be refined until the research paper is submitted before the end of May.
- An in-person meeting in late June would solidify Peras progress and resolve outstanding issues that might block PI6 objectives.
